Shader Differential Container Metrics Policy

The instruction_count and register_count metrics are read from the emitted Cg
containers. They are not recomputed from decoded instructions by the harness.

container-metrics-baseline.csv is the gate trigger. When it is present beside
stage-differential.ps1, staging reports SDIFF-METRICS-GATE and fails by default
if any row has a larger instruction_delta or register_delta than its matching
baseline row. The match key is role, name, profile, source, and uniform_set.

Use -MetricsReportOnly for explicit investigative runs that should print the
same gate line without failing the stage. New rows missing from the baseline
are reported as missing_baseline_rows and do not fail by themselves; accepting
new rows should update the baseline in the same reviewed change.

The role=reference baseline rows are cost protection for the curated durable
reference-pair stage. They are not corpus-wide cost coverage; broader corpus
cost policy lives in the reference-corpus and reference-tree-corpus roles.
As recorded on 2026-09-05, those 66 rows total 1447 instructions against the
reference's 934, and 266 registers against the reference's 152, with 45 of 66
rows carrying a positive register delta. The baseline records current cost, not
acceptable cost; baseline_regressions=0 means nothing got worse, not that the
cost is acceptable.

If every current row is missing from a present baseline, the gate reports
status=no-coverage instead of status=ok. In fail-by-default mode that fails the
stage, because no baseline row was actually compared.

Any commit that moves an existing baseline row in the worse direction must say
so in its commit message and explain why the higher cost is accepted.

Versioned input identities (incremental migration)

identity_version=1 adds source_sha256, compile_flags, resolved_includes and
oracle_sha256 to the five-field row identity. Source and include hashes fold
CRLF bytes to LF; other bytes, including a BOM or standalone CR, are unchanged.
The oracle hash covers the executable's exact bytes. Compiler-under-test hashes
belong in session provenance, not this comparison key: changes between our
compiler revisions are the regressions this gate is meant to detect.

compile_flags is canonical compact JSON with ordered ours/reference arrays of
arguments, including profile, excluding input/output filenames. Argument order
is preserved. resolved_includes is canonical compact JSON, an array of objects
with side (ours/reference), path (relative to the root source directory), and
sha256. Each side records its own resolved includes. All hashes are lowercase
64-hex. Unknown versions, partial identities, malformed JSON/hashes, duplicate
includes and duplicate exact baseline versions are errors, even in ReportOnly.

The stager records the effective arguments used by each actual compile. It
checks input hashes before/after invocation and the reference executable hash
before/after each reference compile. All eleven metrics insertion sites require
those records. A row is versioned only for a proven dependency graph: literal
quoted includes found beside the including file, without a conditional or macro
include. System/search-path, cyclic/repeated, line-spliced, line-directive,
non-UTF8 or cross-file conditional graphs remain unversioned. These conservative
limits never silently stand in for a complete preprocessor dependency trace.
SDIFF-METRICS-UNVERSIONED reports their count and full keys/reasons. Expansion to
actual compiler/oracle dependency traces is tracked separately.

Once any baseline version exists for a five-field identity, legacy fallback is
disabled for that identity, even if a legacy row is also present. A missing or
unmatched input version reports identity-mismatch and fails the enforcing gate;
it is not counted as a compiler cost regression against a different program.
Source, flags, include and oracle mismatch counts remain separately visible.
Other never-versioned identities retain legacy matching during migration.
No historical pixel status is inherited into a new input version.
Corpus inputs are registered before compilation: a refused attempted versioned
input fails with a named missing-result diagnostic even when no container row
can be emitted. This does not demand baseline rows outside the stage's selected
input set, and never-versioned corpus refusals retain their existing behavior.

The scalar-lanes migration keeps separate old/current source rows for both
reference and reference-tree-corpus. Their counts come from controlled fresh
compiles, not guessed historical flags, dependencies or oracle provenance.

Reviewed, named allowances (opt-in only)

stage-differential.ps1 accepts -MetricsAllowancePath <UTF-8 JSON>. With an empty
path it preserves the existing gate and output. No allowance ships by default.
The caller is responsible for obtaining approval for the named exceptions.

Schema version 1 has exactly two top-level fields:
  { "schema_version": 1, "entries": [ ... ] }
Each entry has exactly these fields:
  role, name, profile, source, uniform_set: exact case-sensitive row identity
  card, reason: nonblank strings (a descriptive card is accepted)
  count: the JSON integer 1 (the CSV key must identify one row)
  historical, current: objects with these six JSON integer fields:
    ours_instruction_count, reference_instruction_count, instruction_delta,
    ours_register_count, reference_register_count, register_delta
Raw counts must be nonnegative and each delta must equal ours minus reference.
The historical object pins the baseline CSV values; current pins staged values.
Counts and deltas must fit signed 32-bit integers. Identity fields cannot contain
the key delimiter '|'. Unknown or missing fields are rejected.
Schema-v1 allowances cannot cover versioned baseline identities; a migrated
entry must be removed explicitly. Remaining legacy entries still match exactly.
Repeated JSON member names are rejected, including equivalent escaped names.

Each entry must match one actual regression, all five identity fields, and all
twelve metric values. Missing/fixed/improved rows make an entry stale and fail;
growth, changed reference counts, duplicate keys, or malformed files also fail.
An allowance requires a baseline, even with -MetricsReportOnly. Invalid
allowances throw regardless of ReportOnly. A valid partial allowance leaves
unmatched regressions failing in the default enforcing mode.

The original Summary.Status and BaselineRegressions remain visible. The opt-in
result adds EffectiveStatus, AllowedRegressions, UnallowedRegressions,
AllowedKeys, and Allowance (absolute Path and Sha256 of the exact parsed bytes).
EffectiveStatus is allowed only when every raw regression matches an entry;
otherwise it retains the raw status, including no-coverage. Empty entries
waive nothing. SDIFF-METRICS-ALLOWANCE prints the effective verdict and pin.

The stager writes container-metrics-gate.json beside container-metrics.csv
before enforcing the verdict, so a mixed allowed/unallowed failure retains
its evidence. The boot/session consumer must pin the allowance in advance,
record that pin in its session evidence, and call
Assert-ContainerMetricsAllowancePin before every boot, comparing the gate's
pin with the session's expected pin. Metrics allowance is not pixel proof.
